# Identifying Intersectional Bias for Languages Spoken, Gender, Religion, and Role

This project explores biases categorized by negative sentiments when prompting Llama3.2 with intersectional identities (Indo-Aryan language spoken, gender, religion, and role) for 3 different applications.

Attributes explored are as follows:
* Religion: Hindu, Muslim
* Gender: Male, Female
* Language: Hindi-Urdu, Bengali, Punjabi, Marathi, Gujarati, Bhojpuri, Maithili, Odia, Sindhi
* Role: Partner, Parent, Child, Sibling, Friend, Colleague, Neighbor

Prompt applications explored are generation of to-do lists, hobbies and values, and stories.

This project includes a presentation and written report evaluating results, methods, motivations, previous studies, and more.
* 📖 Report: [Identifying and Measuring Intersectional Bias in LLMs.pdf](https://github.com/mamnuya/intersection_bias_advNLP/blob/main/Identifying%20and%20Measuring%20Intersectional%20Bias%20in%20LLMs.pdf)
* 🖼️ Presentation: [Identifying and Measuring Intersectional Bias in LLMs.pptx](https://github.com/mamnuya/intersection_bias_advNLP/blob/main/Identifying%20and%20Measuring%20Intersectional%20Bias%20in%20LLMs.pptx)

## Files
data/intersectional_identity_dataset_full.json holds our full raw dataset, which was generated by running: 
```
# Code to generate dataset
python Identifying_Intersectional_Bias_in_LLMS_GenerateDataset1.py
```

### Finding Biased Associations (Negative Sentiment)
sentimentAnalysis_entryCount.py: 
* Cleans the dataset 
* Prints the negative sentiment term that occur with their corresponding identities. Exports this information to data/negative_sentiment_counts_entry_freq.json. 
* Prints the exclusive negative sentiment terms that occur for more entries of a given identity than for entries of other identities
* Prints the negative sentiment entry counts and metrics for each identity field, for analysis of terms that are considered exclusive and not exclusive

metricInterpretation.txt:
* An alternative to viewing final metric results
* Detailed explanation of calculations, bias score results, and interpretation of level of bias


### Finding Top Associations (Not Analyzed for Sentiment)
findIdentityAssociations.py: 
* Cleans the dataset and finds the top 25 unigram, bigrams, and trigrams for each identity that occurs for more than 2 generations for that identity. Exports this information to data/identity_marker_counts_25.json, which does not define categories of n-grams.
* Some of these top n-grams are included in data/associations.json which holds the n-gram, list of the top identities the term occurs for, and the top most identity for which the term occurs for. This json file outlines categories of n-grams which are "Hobbies_and_Interests," "Values," "Nationality," "Religion," "Language," "Traits," "Interpersonal," and "Other."
* NOTE: SOME of the top n-grams are exported to data/associations.json, but not all top n-grams. To observe ALL of the top n-grams, observe data/identity_marker_counts_25.json. 




exclusiveIdentityAssociations.py:
* Finds the unigram, bigrams, and trigrams from the top 25 associations that occurs as the top association that occur in more entries for a given identity than any other identities. Exports this information to data/identity_trends.json.  
* Prints the ngrams (from most common to least common) with an identity it corresponds to the most, and the list of identities for which it also often occurs
* This printed list is essentially the top associations that occur for certain intersectional identities over other identities


## Installation
Use the package manager [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/) to install libraries.

```
pip install nltk
pip install pydantic
```

## Usage
Keep the intersectional_identity_dataset.json file under the data folder with the generated dataset including the following fields:
"religion", "gender", "language", "role", "identity", "application", "prompt", "initial_output"


Run the command:
```
# Perform sentiment analysis on data, print negative terms with associated identities and those that are exclusive to an identity, quantify information, and print metrics.
python sentimentAnalysis_entryCount.py
```

## Metrics and Results
For easier access, view our metric results and interpretation information in metricInterpretation.txt.
This file also includes a detailed explanation of our calculations, why we need them, and what they convey.

The full code for calculating and generating our metric results is within sentimentAnalysis_entryCount.py
